Part 1
The work opens in a village of La Mancha, Spain, where a country gentleman’s 
infatuation with books of chivalry leads him to decide to become a knight-errant, 
and he assumes the name Don Quixote. He finds an antique suit of armour and attaches 
a visor made of pasteboard to an old helmet. He then declares that his old nag is 
the noble steed Rocinante. According to Don Quixote, a knight-errant also needs a 
lady to love, and he selects a peasant girl from a nearby town, christening her 
Dulcinea del Toboso. Thus accoutred, he heads out to perform deeds of heroism in 
her name. He arrives at an inn, which he believes is a castle, and insists that the 
innkeeper knight him. After being told that he must carry money and extra clothes, 
Don Quixote decides to go home. On his way, he picks a fight with a group of 
merchants, and they beat him. When he recovers, he persuades the peasant Sancho 
Panza to act as his squire with the promise that Sancho will one day get an island 
to rule.

Dante Alighieri (1265-1321), Italian poet. The author of Divina Commedia 
(Divine Comedy), the great Italian epic poem which tells the story of Dante's 
journey through hell, purgatory and heaven, the three realms of the dead.

Don Quixote and Sancho, mounted on a donkey, set out. In their first adventure, 
Don Quixote mistakes a field of windmills for giants and attempts to fight them 
but finally concludes that a magician must have turned the giants into windmills. 
He later attacks a group of monks, thinking that they have imprisoned a princess, 
and also does battle with a herd of sheep, among other adventures, almost all of 
which end with Don Quixote, Sancho, or both being beaten. Eventually, Don Quixote 
acquires a metal washbasin from a barber, which he believes is a helmet once worn 
by a famous knight, and he later frees a group of convicted criminals.

Don Quixote subsequently encounters Cardenio, who lives like a wild man in the 
woods because he believes that Luscinda, the woman he loves, betrayed him. 
Don Quixote decides to emulate him to prove his great love for Dulcinea, and he 
sends Sancho to deliver a letter to her. When Sancho stops at an inn, he finds 
two of Don Quixote’s old friends, a priest and a barber, looking for him. They 
decide that one of them should pose as a damsel in distress to try to lure 
Don Quixote home. En route, they come across a young woman, Dorotea, who was 
betrayed by Don Fernando, who married Luscinda. Dorotea agrees to pretend to be 
a princess whose kingdom has been seized by a giant, and Don Quixote is persuaded 
to help her. They stop at the inn, where Don Fernando and Luscinda soon arrive. 
Luscinda is reunited with Cardenio, and Don Fernando promises to marry Dorotea. 
Later, the priest and the barber put Don Quixote in a wooden cage and persuade him 
that he is under an enchantment that will take him to Dulcinea. Eventually, they 
return him home.

Part 2
Part 2 begins a month after the end of part 1, but many of the characters have 
already read that book and so know about Don Quixote. He becomes convinced that 
Dulcinea is under an enchantment that has turned her into an ordinary peasant girl. 
Don Quixote and Sancho meet a duke and duchess who are prone to pranks. In one 
such ruse, they persuade the two men that Sancho must give himself 3,300 lashes 
to break the curse on Dulcinea. The duke later makes Sancho the governor of a 
town that he tells Sancho is the isle of Barataria. There Sancho is presented with 
various disputes, and he shows wisdom in his decisions. However, after a week in 
office and being subjected to other pranks, he decides to give up the governorship. 
In the meantime, the duke and duchess play other tricks on Don Quixote.

Eventually, Don Quixote and Sancho leave. After learning that a false sequel to 
the book about him says that he traveled to Zaragoza, Don Quixote decides to avoid 
that city and go instead to Barcelona. Following various adventures there, 
Don Quixote is challenged by the Knight of the White Moon (a student from La Mancha 
in disguise), and he is defeated. According to the terms of the battle, Don Quixote 
is required to return home. Along the way, Sancho pretends to administer the 
required lashings to himself, and they meet a character from the false sequel. 
After they arrive home, Don Quixote falls ill, renounces chivalry as foolish fiction, 
and dies.